- Storage media are classified by the speed with which data can be accessed, by the cost per unit of data to buy the medium, and by the medium's reliability.
- Media typically available are:
	- **[[Cache]]**: This is the fastest and most costly form of storage. It is managed by computer system hardware, but has implications on the performance of the database. Database implementors do pay attention to cache effects when designing query processing data structures and algorithms, but database users do not have that level of control.
	- **[[Main Memory | Main memory]]**: The storage media used for data that are available to be operated on is main memory. Although main memory may be very large, it is usually not large enough (since it can be too expensive) for storing the entire database. Furthermore, the main memory is volatile and its contents are lost if a power failure or crash occur.
	- **[[Flash Memory]]**: Flash memory differs from main memory in that it retains stored data even if power is turned off (or fails). There are two types of flash memory, called *NAND* and *NOR* flash. Of these, *NAND* flash offers more storage capacity for a given cost, and is widely used in devices such as cameras, music players, and cell phones, and increasingly in laptop computers as well. 
	  
	  Flash memory is cheaper per byte than main memory, which is another benefit that it offers along with being non-volatile, which means it retains stored data even if the power is switched off. Flash memory is also widely used for storing data in "USB keys", which can be plugged into the [[Universal Serial Bus]] (USB) slots of computing devices. Such USB keys have become a popular means of transporting data between computer systems ("floppy disks" played the same role in earlier days, but their limited capacity has made them obsolete now).
	  
	  Flash memory is also increasingly used as a replacement for [[Magnetic-Disk Storage]] for storing moderate amounts of data. Such disk-drive replacements are called [[Solid-State Drives]]. As of 2009, a 64 GB solid-state hard drive costs less than $200, and capacities range up to 160 GB. Further, flash memory is increasingly being used in server systems to improve performance by caching frequently used data, since it provides faster access than disk, with larger storage capacity than main memory (for a given cost).
	- [[Magnetic-Disk Storage]]: The primary medium for the long-term online storage of data is the magnetic disk. Usually, the entire database is stored in on magnetic disk. The system must move the data from disk to main memory so that they can be accessed. After the system has performed the designated operations, the data that have been modified must be written to disk.
	- [[Optical Storage]]: The most popular forms of optical storage are the *compact disk (CD)*, which can hold about 700 megabytes of data and has a playtime of about 80 minutes, and the [[Digital Video Disk]] (DVD), which can hold 4.7 or 8.5 gigabytes of data per side of the disk (or up to 17 gigabytes on a two-sided disk). The expression **digital versatile disk** is also used in place of **digital video disk**, since DVDs can hold any digital data, not just video data. Data are stored optically on a disk, and are read by laser. A higher capacity format called [[Blu-ray DVD]] can store 27 gigabytes per layer, or 54 gigabytes in a double-layer disk.
	  
	  The optical disks used in read-only compact disks (CD-ROM) or read-only digital video disk (DVD-ROM) cannot be written, but are supplied with data prerecorded. There are also "record-once" versions of compact disk (called CD-R) and digital video disk (called DVD-R and DVD+R), which can be written only once; such disks  are called [[Write-Once, Read-Many (WORM) Disks]]. There are also "multiple-write" versions of compact disk (called CD-RW) and digital video disk (DVD-RW, DVD+RW, and DVD-RAM), which can be written multiple times.
	  
	  Optical disk **jukebox** systems contain a few drives and numerous disks that can be loaded into one of the drives automatically (by a robot arm) on demand.
	  - [[Tape Storage]]: Tape storage is used primarily for backup and archival data. Although magnetic tape is cheaper than disks, access to data is much slower, because the tape must be accessed sequentially from the beginning. For this reason, the tape storage is referred to as **sequential-access** storage. In contrast, disk storage is referred to as **direct-access** storage because it is possible to read data from any location on disk. Tapes have a high capacity (40- to 300-gigabyte tapes are currently available), and can be removed from the tape drive, so they are well suited for cheap archival storage. Tape libraries (jukeboxes) are used to hold exceptionally large collections of data such as data from satellites, which could include as much as hundreds of terabytes (1 terabyte = $10^{12}$ bytes), or even multiple petabytes (1 petabyte = $10^{15}$ bytes) of data in a few cases.  
- The various storage media can be organized in a hierarchy. The higher levels of the hierarchy are fast, but also costly. As we go down the hierarchy the cost per bit of the storage media decreases, but access times go up.
- The fastest storage media - for example, cache and main memory - are referred to as **primary storage**. The media in the next level in the hierarchy - for example, magnetic disks - are referred to as **secondary storage**, or **online storage**. The media in the lowest level in the hierarchy - for example, magnetic tape and optical-disk jukeboxes - are referred to as **tertiary storage**, or **offline storage**.
## Related Articles
- [[Chapter 10 - Storage and File Structure]]

